Step 1: Start

       Begin the program.

Step 2: Initialize Cache Parameters

        Number of cache lines (num_lines)

Mapping technique (direct, associative, or set-associative)

Associativity for set-associative mapping

Replacement policy (FIFO, LRU, or LFU)

Sequence of memory block references

Step 3: Create Cache Structure

       Divide the cache into sets based on the mapping technique:

Direct Mapping → Each block maps to one cache line.

Associative Mapping → One set containing all cache lines.

Set-Associative Mapping → Cache divided into multiple sets, each with assoc lines.

Initialize each cache line with:

Block value = NULL

Insert time = 0

Last used time = 0

Frequency count = 0

Initialize counters:

hits = 0

misses = 0

time_counter = 0

Step 4: Process Each Memory Block Reference


Step 5: Determine Cache Set

Calculate the set index using:

set_index = block % number_of_sets

For associative mapping, always select set 0.

Step 6: Search Block in Cache Set

Scan all cache lines in the selected set:

If the block is found → HIT

If the block is not found → MISS

Step 7: On Cache Hit

If a HIT occurs:

Increment the hit counter.

Update:

last_used time of the cache line.

Frequency count (freq) of the cache line.

Display cache state after the hit.

Step 8: On Cache Miss

If a MISS occurs:

Increment the miss counter.

Check for an empty cache line in the set.

If an empty line exists, select it.

Otherwise, select a victim line using the selected replacement policy:

FIFO: Replace the block that entered the cache first.

LRU: Replace the least recently used block.

LFU: Replace the least frequently used block (tie broken by oldest entry).

Replace the victim line with the new block.

Update insertion time, last used time, and frequency.

Display cache state after the miss.

Step 9: Repeat

Repeat Steps 6 to 8 for all memory block references.

Step 10: Display Results

After processing all references:

Display total number of cache hits.

Display total number of cache misses.

Calculate hit ratio using:

hit_ratio = hits / (hits + misses)

Step 11: Stop

         End the program.